chore(data model): Add some metric tag model documentation (#15721)
vectordotdev/vector: website/content/en/highlights/2022-12-22-enhanced-metric-tags.md

---
date: "2022-12-22"
title: "Enhanced Metric Tags"
description: "The metric data model now supports an enhanced representation of tag values"
authors: ["bruceg"]
pr_numbers: [14742]
release: "0.27.0"
hide_on_release_notes: false
badges:
  type: enhancement
---

> The existing set of tags that have been available on metrics was a simple mapping of string values
> to single string keys. Some sources, however, may produce metrics that contain tags that don't fit
> into this model.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The existing set of tags that have been available on metrics was a simple mapping of string values
to single string keys. Some sources, however, may produce metrics that contain tags that don't fit
into this model. They can produce tags that are static strings (rather than key/value) or that have multiple
values for a given key.
```

Author: Updated in 4656d788c

> With this release, tag values may now contain a set of values, each of which may be a string value
> or `null`, which represents a "bare" tag (ie a tag with no value, as distinct from an empty string
> value). This new tag set only stores unique values, as duplicated tags are not useful for any
> component, and so each tag name/value pair will appear only once across all tags.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With this release, tag values for a given key may now contain a set of values, each of which may be a string value
or `null`, which represents a "bare" tag (i.e. a tag with no value, as distinct from an empty string
value). This new tag set only stores unique values, as duplicated tags are not useful for any
component, and so each tag name/value pair will appear only once across all tags.
```

For compatibility with previous releases, this value set also tracks the last seen or assigned value

> for each tag. Since most components can only make use of a single value for each tag, this last

Reviewer: ```suggestion
for each tag. Since most components, especially sinks, can only make use of a single value for each tag, this last
```

Author: Fixed in 6bce9befc

value is used by those components.

The scripting components of `lua` and `remap` have been extended with a configuration option of
`metric_tag_values`. This controls how these tag values are exposed to scripts. In the default
setting of `single`, tag values will be exposed as the single value described above. This behavior
matches the existing behavior of scripts so that no script changes will be needed. When set to

> `full`, however, all tag values are exposed as an array at each element. In either case, scripts may

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`full`, however, all tag values are exposed as an array for each tag key. In either case, scripts may
```

Author: Fixed in 1dd64f6b4

assign either a single value or an array of values to a tag.

For example:

```coffee
.tags.host = "localhost" # Assign a single string value
.tags.bare = null # Create a single-valued bare tag
.tags.complex = ["remotehost", null, "otherhost"] # Creates three tag values
```

> This setting also shows up in the `codec` configuration of sinks and controls how metric tags are

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This `metric_tag_values` setting also shows up in the `codec` configuration of sinks and controls how metric tags are
```

Author: Fixed in 1dd64f6b4

exposed in codecs that can encode metrics. As above, when set to `full`, these codecs will expose
all values of tags either as arrays (for the `json` codec) or as repeated instances of each tag (for

> the `text` codec). This setting does not apply to the `native` and `native_json` codecs which

Reviewer: The `native_json` encoding is also intended for end-user use (in particular with sources like the `exec` source) so any changes to it should be highlighted as breaking. We could opt to expose this setting there too to let people opt into the new model.
